first draft of data log update (#92)
The-Strategy-Unit/nhp_project_information: data_extraction/data_log.qmd

This page contains information about changes to the data underpinning the NHP model. If there are no changes logged for a particular version (such as 1.0) then the changes were only to the model code, and not to the underlying data.

## Version 2.1

Date updated: 08/08/2024

### Inpatients

#### Procedures

We have improved the flagging of which inpatient activity is classified as procedure or not.
This is now done using the following code:

If the procedure code meets the following criteria, then `has_procedure = 0`:

```
                p.OPCODE LIKE 'O1[1-46]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O28%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O3[01346]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O4[2345678]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O5[23]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'X[6-9]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE '[UYZ%]'
```

Else, `has_procedure = 1`

#### Last episode in spell

> We have improved the flagging of which episode is used as the last episode in spell. This has been done using the following methodology:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have improved the flagging of which episode is used as the last episode in spell. This has been done using the published [Methodology to create provider and CIP spells from HES APC data](https://files.digital.nhs.uk/B6/4A484B/Methodology%20to%20create%20provider%20and%20CIP%20spells%20from%20HES%20APC%20data%20v2.pdf) from NHS Digital, September 2021.
```.

The methodology is all laid out in the linked document. The Sql used is below (slightly modified because we have some additional linkage tables in our own datawarehouse that aren't standard):

``` sql
SELECT
  t.EPIKEY
FROM (
  SELECT
    i.EPIKEY,
    RN = ROW_NUMBER() OVER (
      PARTITION BY i.token_person_id, i.ADMIDATE, i.PROCODE3, ISNULL(i.PROVSPNOPS, i.PROVSPNO)
      ORDER BY i.EPISTART DESC, i.EPIORDER DESC, i.EPIEND DESC, i.EPIKEY DESC
    )
  FROM
    tbInpatients i
  WHERE
    i.EPISTAT = '3' -- Finished consultant episode
  AND
    i.CLASSPAT IN ('1', '2', '5')
) t
  WHERE
      t.RN = 1;
```

Reviewer: note on this, the code we use for last episode in spell is outside of NHP scope as it's just part of our sql server stuff which isn't currently under version control. that will change when we move to databricks

## Version 2.1

Date updated: 08/08/2024

### Inpatients

#### Procedures

We have improved the flagging of which inpatient activity is classified as procedure or not.
This is now done using the following code:

If the procedure code meets the following criteria, then `has_procedure = 0`:

```
                p.OPCODE LIKE 'O1[1-46]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O28%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O3[01346]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O4[2345678]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'O5[23]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE 'X[6-9]%'
            OR  p.OPCODE LIKE '[UYZ%]'
```

Else, `has_procedure = 1`

#### Last episode in spell

We have improved the flagging of which episode is used as the last episode in spell. This has been done using the published [Methodology to create provider and CIP spells from HES APC data](https://files.digital.nhs.uk/B6/4A484B/Methodology%20to%20create%20provider%20and%20CIP%20spells%20from%20HES%20APC%20data%20v2.pdf) from NHS Digital, September 2021.

> The methodology is all laid out in the linked document. The Sql used is below (slightly modified because we have some additional linkage tables in our own datawarehouse that aren't standard):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methodology is all laid out in the linked document, under the section "Creating provider spells from episodes". The Sql used is below:
```

I would probably drop the text "(slightly modified because we have some additional linkage tables in our own datawarehouse that aren't standard)" as it's a bit superfluous. The additional linkage tables are entirely our own due to historical changes specifically to our hes data returns

```sql

> SELECT
>   t.EPIKEY
> FROM (
>   SELECT
>     i.EPIKEY,
>     RN = ROW_NUMBER() OVER (
>       PARTITION BY i.token_person_id, i.ADMIDATE, i.PROCODE3, ISNULL(i.PROVSPNOPS, i.PROVSPNO)
>       ORDER BY i.EPISTART DESC, i.EPIORDER DESC, i.EPIEND DESC, i.EPIKEY DESC
>     )
>   FROM
>     tbInpatients i
>   WHERE
>     i.EPISTAT = '3' -- Finished consultant episode
>   AND
>     i.CLASSPAT IN ('1', '2', '5')
> ) t
>   WHERE
>       t.RN = 1;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT
  t.EPIKEY
FROM (
  SELECT
    EPIKEY,
    RN = ROW_NUMBER() OVER (
      PARTITION BY token_person_id, ADMIDATE, PROCODE3, PROVSPNOPS
      ORDER BY EPISTART DESC, EPIORDER DESC, EPIEND DESC, EPIKEY DESC
    )
  FROM
    apc
  WHERE
    EPISTAT = '3' -- Finished consultant episode
  AND
    CLASSPAT IN ('1', '2', '5')
) t
  WHERE
      t.RN = 1;
```

sorry, I meant to modify the code slightly to make it a bit more standard
